# Md Mohaiminul Islam Emon - Predicting Injuries in Norwegian Women’s Soccer Players: A Machine Learning Approach.

## Abstract

This thesis investigates the feasibility and effectiveness of machine learning in predicting injuries among Norwegian women’s soccer players. We have identified certain features, including illness, weekly load, Chronic Training Load over the past 28 days, Acute Training Load, Chronic Training Load over the past 42 days, monotony, strain, and Acute:Chronic Workload Ratio, have a strong correlation with injury occurrence. We also identified the most effective time frame for predicting injuries, while algorithms including Decision Tree, K‑Nearest Neighbors, LSTM, and XGBoost performed best using a 32‑day time frame. Furthermore, we have investigated eight machine learning algorithms performance to predict Norwegian women’s soccer players injuries. XGBoost performed the best with an F1 score of 0.58. The model achieved a recall of 0.50 and a precision of 0.71, showcasing its strong performance in predicting soccer player injuries while also minimizing the occurrence of false positive predictions.

We have conducted hyperparameter tuning on seven machine learning algorithms to evaluate their performance before and after the tuning process. After conducting hyperparameter tuning, we observed enhanced performance in algorithms such as Logistic Regression, Random Forest, K‑Nearest Neighbors, Support Vector Machine, and Naive Bayes. Furthermore, we evaluate the performance of machine learning algorithms on a single team dataset. We found that K‑Nearest Neighbors performed exceptionally well in predicting injuries for a single team. On the other hand, XGBoost emerged as the top performer for predicting injuries across multiple teams. We also analyzed our algorithms performance, specifically on the injured players dataset. We identified that XGBoost performed best among other algorithms, whereas Decision Tree and K‑Nearest Neighbors showed moderate performance. Lastly, we have evaluated algorithms performance based on dataset size. The full dataset had a class imbalance (56 injury records, 8526 non‑injured records), making it difficult to predict injuries. The single team dataset (Team A) provided better predictions within that specific context but may not be applicable to other teams. Analyzing only the dataset of injured players revealed specific patterns but may not capture broader injury trends.

Our research introduces a novel approach to predicting injuries in women’s soccer players using machine learning algorithms. Furthermore, this thesis offers meaningful insights for players, coaches, medical professionals, and physicians interested in studying soccer player injuries and related factors.

## Datasets
* **SoccerMon:** See _Midoglu et al., "A large-scale multivariate soccer athlete health, performance, and position monitoring dataset", Nature Scientific Data, 2024._ (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-024-03386-x) and _Midoglu et al., "SoccerMon: A Large-Scale Multivariate Soccer Athlete Health, Performance, and Position Monitoring Dataset", Zenodo, 2022._ (https://zenodo.org/records/10033832)
* **Original_version:** We have created the original version dataset using a combination of subjective metrics and GPS data from the objective metrics of SoccerMon. Note: We have used publicly available GPS data from M. Menkerud Sagbakken (https://github.com/simula/pmsys/tree/main/mathias-menkerud-sagbakken).
* **Team_A_version:** In the original version, we had two Norwegian women's soccer players team datasets. In the Team_A_version, we have only considered the data for Team A and dropped Team B.
* **Team_B_version:** In the Team_B_version, we have considered records only related to Team B, dropped records relate to Team A.
* **Filtered version:** The filtered_version dataset includes information exclusively on injured players from both Team A and Team B. Note: Instead of creating a separate CSV file, we filtered the data directly from the original_version dataset during the data preprocessing stage.

## Notebooks
* **Preproccesing.ipynb:** This interactive Python notebook contains the code for data preprocessing.
* **EDA.ipynb:** This notebook contains the code for exploratory data analysis. We have done extensive data analysis to understand the dataset. The EDA part includes correlation analysis, pairplot visualization, boxplot visualization, time series analysis, and so on.
* **Feature Engineering.ipynb:** The feature engineering notebook has the Python code for feature extraction, feature scaling, feature importance analysis and selection, and feature redundancy.
* **Injury Prediction for Original Version Dataset:** In this folder, we have the Python notebooks for eight machine learning algorithms to predict injury using the original_version dataset. The hyperparameter tuning folder contains the notebooks for tuning on seven machine learning algorithms.
* **Injury Prediction for Team A Version Dataset:** This folder contains the Python notebooks for eight machine learning algorithms to predict injury using the Team_A_version dataset.
* **Injury Prediction for Filtered Version Dataset:** In this folder, we have stored Python notebooks for eight machine learning algorithms to predict injury using filtered versions (only injured players) of the dataset.

## Requirements to Use the Codebase
* **Required Packages:** We have used a wide range of Python libraries, such as NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Scikit-learn, LightGBM for our project.
* **Data Access:** For further research, researchers can directly use the data stored in the Datasets folder of this repository, or it is also possible to use the main dataset named SoccerMon available from Zenodo.
* **How to Run:** We have used Google Colab Pro to write and run our code. It is suggested that if users want to run this code on a platform such as Visual Studio Code or Jupyter Notebook, they must configure the platform for the required Python packages and libraries.

## Ethical Considerations
The dataset includes information on players from two Norwegian soccer teams. Since this data contains both subjective and objective details, including personal and sensitive information, it is crucial to prioritize the privacy and security of the participants. To achieve this, we have taken steps to anonymize the data thoroughly. This involves removing all metadata and using randomly generated file names, a widely accepted method for protecting data privacy. Additionally, all players are fully informed about how the data is collected, its nature, and the purpose of its use. This ensures transparency and ethical handling of the data throughout the research process.
